
Studying history is at its most fundamental the art of mapping the past. Yet, to do so requires what John Lewis Gaddis calls a historical consciousness, a mindset that “leaves you, as does maturity itself, with a simultaneous sense of your own significance and insignificance.”   Assisting students to mature is no small task, but as a teacher, I strongly believe that my role is to help guide students through this process – encouraging them to become critical and engaged observers of their surroundings. While I strive to help students understand and analyze the past, I also hope to encourage them to become thorough researchers, analytical thinkers, effective communicators, and empathetic scholars. 

To this end, I approach teaching and research as an iterative process, focusing on research questions over disciplinary divisions. I believe building a course around what was the impact of the Cold War on the United States rather than general topics such as modern American history, encourages students to model the actual work of a historian, instead of focusing on ‘facts and dates’. While the needs of students vary, I believe that regardless of skill level all students should be exposed to the authentic work of a historian – that is striving to craft questions, answers, and narratives from a multitude of sources about the past. Thus, I design all my courses from the basis that historical research involves continual engagement with primary and secondary materials, as well as an iterative approach to conceptualizing and communicating information. For example, in my course on the Cold War, students are required to conduct primary research in various archives, collecting newspaper clippings or newsreels, and utilizing these materials as the basis for a multimedia assignment, which they then revise into a traditional essay. In revising the assignment into multiple formats, I design courses that have multiple points where students receive feedback, and build a scaffold for refining ideas and arguments over the course of a semester.

I believe that this emphasis on incremental knowledge creation assists students’ development of a broad range of skills, from writing essays and blog posts, to crafting data visualizations, to building maps and datasets. Part of encouraging this staged and multi-modal approach is my belief that students need a wider range of literacies to participate in modern society. I also believe that this method gives the students an opportunity to engage with broader academic and public audiences, which furthers their understanding of the value of historical thinking and research. For students, developing diverse skill sets and engaging with larger audiences both offers a more interactive and authentic learning experience, and allows them to take ownership of their intellectual production. For example in my course on the Arab Spring, the class used twitter to extend classroom discussions virtually. One week a student’s tweet about Islam in the Arab Spring went viral among Islamist networks in Saudi Arabia. This authentic experience was both crucial for making the material less abstract, and humanizing our classroom discussions about modern Islam.
    In my teaching and research, I also adopt the collaborative or flipped classroom model. Thus, in my course on Missionaries in Modern History, I center the course on the questions of defining missionaries and tracing their impact around the globe. This course involves both interrogating the analytic category of missionaries, and collaboratively building answers to open historical questions - specifically, where do missionaries travel and how should we understand their global influence. In this course, the collaboration infuses both the final project, which is a digital database and mapping project, and the classroom discussions, which use digital tools to collaboratively annotate class notes. Students also build content for a course website that functions both as a showcase for students’ work, and as a public outreach and legacy piece. All my courses involve some form of course website, and I especially emphasize students sharing, commenting, and revising their work on the site. I believe that this public accountability for student work is key to both developing communication skills and providing students with the basis for a portfolio, rather than relying solely on grades for evaluation. 
     A crucial aspect of Gaddis’ approach to mapping the landscape of the past is denaturalizing the normal and familiarizing the foreign. In my course on the United States and Empire, I challenge my students’ preconceived notions about American history and the flow of history through organizing the course ‘backwards’.  Instead of starting deep in the past, this course starts in the present and moves from the more familiar into the depths of the past. While such an approach can make the past feel more distant, I believe that this backwards design process is critical for destabilizing history as a teleological process, and demonstrating the importance of contingencies and continuities in shaping both the present and history. In the United States and Empire, the course assignments embody this unconventional approach, and are organized are around weekly problems, such as how did world fairs involve empire making or how did the end of the Cold War shape empire. These questions are answered through writing thematic overviews and book reviews, as well as a final Digital Media History Project. This Digital Media project is intended to help students learn digital literacies, and develop methods for contextualizing and assessing digital and web-based historical sources.
    Ultimately, the most important skill learned in my classrooms is more of an  how to be an engaged and empathetic citizen. As a Graduate Fellow for the Vanderbilt Institute of Digital Learning, I developed a digital pedagogy entitled the Citizen Researcher, which combines the open sourced and collaborative ethos of citizen journalism and citizen science with the rigor of academic research. Unlike citizen journalism, which encourages a particular political agenda, and citizen science, which relies the creation of digital tools, Citizen Researcher is about leveraging the power of available digital tools to craft projects that are based around empathy and engagement with an historical problem. For example, in my courses on Middle Eastern history, the students often feel well informed about the region, given the sheer amount of media coverage. While, learning about the region’s history challenges these assumptions, I consciously push the students to move beyond depictions of the region as continually violent, and instead to relate to the struggles of people in the region in the modern era to shape their political communities. Through using social media and digital archives, I encourage the students to directly engage with the experiences of various Middle Eastern communities, as well as . As citizen researchers, students learn to seeI challenge the students to understand the views of Islamist parties, and the longer intellectual history of political Islam. This process forces students to move beyond generalizations or dismissals of certain groups to an acknowledgement of their own historical logics. From this perspective, the students learn to ask the more intellectually engaging questions of how do these groups develop their ideologies and deploy them in certain historical circumstances. Ultimately, I hope all my students learn how to critically analyze and understand issues and people distant from their lived experiences, as well as question the naturalness of their perspectives on the world. I believe that such a learning experience most embodies Gaddis’ description of historical consciousness, and enables students to become both intellectually curious and humble - two of the trademarks of good historians and citizens.